# Omics Big Data  
## Spring 2019  
## Homework 2-1, due date: April 20, 2019  
Reading: read the papers of topic #Microarray and #RNA-Seq. You can find them at the course website: http://cbb.sjtu.edu.cn/~jingli/courses/2019Spring/omics/index.php, and summarize these papers into a one-page mini-review.    
Search PubMed by key words “gene expression microarray” and “RNA-Seq” separately in the recent 5 years. Show the number of related papers in each year into bar plots and explain your results.    
Choose a disease as the key word, find and download the related microarray and RNA-Seq datasets from NCBI’s GEO and SRA (three replicates for both case and control group at least).    
(1) Summarize the datasets briefly, list the number of unique genes detected by microarray or RNA-seq.  
(2) Analyze the expression datasets, perform descriptive statistics and display the data distribution of gene expression values in microarray and RNA-seq.  
(3) Find the top 200 genes with highest fold changes (case/control) detected by
microarray and RNA-seq respectively, and show the overlap with Venn diagram.

--------

# microarray
#### Expression profiling using cDNA microarrays
* cDNA microarrays are capable of profiling gene expression patterns of tens of thousands of genes in a single experiment. DNA targets, in the form of 3 ́ expressed sequence tags (ESTs), are arrayed onto glass slides (or membranes) and probed with fluorescent- or radioactively-labelled cDNAs. Here, we review technical aspects of cDNA microarrays, including the general principles, fabrication of the arrays, target labelling, image analysis and data extraction, management and mining.
#### Monitoring gene expression using DNA microarrays
* The concurrent development of high-density array technologies and the complete sequencing of a number of microbial genomes is providing the opportunity to comprehensively and efficiently survey the transcription profile of microorganisms under different conditions and well-defined genotypes. Microarray-based studies are uncovering broad patterns of genetic activity, providing new understanding of gene functions and, in some cases, generating unexpected insight into transcriptional processes and biological mechanisms. One topic that has come to the forefront is how best to effectively manage and interpret the large data sets being generated. Although progress has been made, this remains a challenging opportunity for functional genomics research.
#### Navigating gene expression using
microarrays — a technology review
* The use of microarrays to analyse gene expression on a global level has recently received a great deal of attention. There has been much speculation about the power of this approach in the analysis of disease and the unravelling of cellular signalling pathways. As the finishing touches are put on the human genome sequence and it becomes clear that it contains less than 40,000 genes, one might hope that we are advancing towards being able to describe fully the regulation of gene-expression networks and how they malfunction in disease. But does the reality live up to the hype? In this review we describe the technology underpinning the microarray revolution, and attempt to address the ways in which it can be used and the type of solutions it can be expected to provide. We also consider the pitfalls of the technology, whether it will pro- vide new insights into cell biology, and how to avoid drowning in a glut of uninterpretable data.
#### Gene-Expression Signatures in Breast Cancer
* Gene-expression profiling with the use of DNA microarrays al- lows measurement of thousands of messenger RNA (mRNA) transcripts in a single experiment. Results of such studies have confirmed that breast can- cer is not a single disease with variable morphologic features and biomarkers but, rather, a group of molecularly distinct neoplastic disorders. Profiling results also support the hypothesis that estrogen-receptor (ER)–negative and ER-positive breast cancers originate from distinct cell types and point to biologic processes that gov- ern metastatic progression. Moreover, such profiling has uncovered molecular signa- tures that could influence clinical care. In this review, we summarize the results of gene-expression studies that hold the most promise to accelerate the transition be- tween empirical and molecular medicine.
#### Quantitative Monitoring of Gene Expression
Patterns With a Complementary DNA Microarray
* A high-capacity system was developed to monitor the expression of many genes in parallel. Microarrays prepared by high-speed robotic printing of complementary DNAs on glass were used for quantitative expression measurements of the corresponding genes. Because of the small format and high density of the arrays, hybridization volumes of 2 microliters could be used that enabled detection of rare transcripts in probe mixtures derived from 2 micrograms of total cellular messenger RNA. Differential expression measurements of 45 Arabidopsis genes were made by means of simultaneous, two-color fluorescence hybridization.
--------
## rna-seq
#### From RNA-seq reads to differential expression results
* The steps in the pipeline are
in red boxes; the methodological components of the pipeline are shown in blue boxes and bold text; software examples and methods for each step (a non-exhaustive list) are shown by regular text in blue boxes. References for the tools and methods shown are listed in Table 1. First, reads are mapped to the reference genome or transcriptome (using junction libraries to map reads that cross exon boundaries); mapped reads are assembled into expression summaries (tables of counts, showing how may reads are in coding region, exon, gene or junction); the data are normalized; statistical testing of differential expression (DE) is performed, producing and a list of genes with associated P-values and fold changes. Systems biology approaches can then be used to gain biological insights from these lists.
#### RNA-Seq: a revolutionary tool for transcriptomics
* RNA-Seq is a recently developed approach to transcriptome profiling that uses deep-sequencing technologies. Studies using this method have already altered our view of the extent and complexity of eukaryotic transcriptomes. RNA-Seq also provides a far more precise measurement of levels of transcripts and their isoforms than other methods. This article describes the RNA-Seq approach, the challenges associated with its application, and the advances made so far in characterizing several eukaryote transcriptomes.
#### RNA sequencing: advances, challenges and opportunities
* In the few years since its initial application, massively parallel cDNA sequencing, or RNA-seq, has allowed many advances in the characterization and quantification of transcriptomes. Recently, several developments in RNA-seq methods have provided an even more complete characterization of RNA transcripts. These developments include improvements in transcription start site mapping, strand-specific measurements, gene fusion detection, small RNA characterization and detection of alternative splicing events. Ongoing developments promise further advances in the application of RNA-seq, particularly direct RNA sequencing and approaches that allow RNA quantification from very small amounts of cellular materials.